Now let us use particles to explain why solids, liquids,
and gases behave so differently.
A solid keeps its shape. A metal spoon does not slowly
pour off the table, which is helpful for lunch.
In a simple particle model, solid particles are close
together and arranged in a pattern. They vibrate, but they
do not wander around the room.
A liquid keeps its volume but changes shape. Water sits in
a glass, then takes the shape of the glass.
In the particle model, liquid particles are still close
together, but they can slide past each other.
A gas spreads out. Air fills a balloon. Take away the
balloon and the gas does not stay in a neat balloon-shaped
lump.
The model explains why solids hold shape, liquids flow,
and gases fill containers.
Heating gives particles more energy. In a solid, enough
heating can let particles move out of fixed positions.
That is melting: solid to liquid.
Cooling removes energy. A liquid can slow down until its
particles settle into a solid pattern. That is freezing:
liquid to solid.
Evaporation is liquid to gas. It can happen at the surface
even without boiling. A wet towel drying is water
particles escaping into the air.
Condensation is gas to liquid. Water vapour meets a cold
surface, slows down, and becomes tiny droplets.
Use the model to predict. If particles are close and
locked into a pattern, the substance keeps its shape. If
they are close but sliding, it flows. If they are far
That is why a balloon gets bigger when you blow air into
it. You are adding gas particles, and they push out into
the space available.
It is also why a puddle slowly dries. The water is not
being deleted. Some particles at the surface have enough
energy to escape into the air.
The model also stops a common mistake. Melting does not
always mean turning into water. Wax can melt. Butter can
melt. Some metals can melt. The state changes; the
Now test the model. Why does a liquid pour? Because its
particles can move past each other. Why does a solid spoon
keep its shape? Because its particles are held in a more
Why can you squeeze air in a syringe more than water? Gas
particles have much more empty space between them. Liquid
particles are already close together, so there is much
The particle model is powerful because it connects what
you see to what you cannot see. Shape, flow, spreading,
drying, fogging, melting, and freezing all become less
It also helps with mass. When water evaporates from an
open puddle, the puddle loses water because particles
leave into the air. The water particles have moved; they
Do not imagine the particles as tiny ice cubes or tiny wet
drops. The dots are a model. They show spacing and
movement, not microscopic photographs.
The chemist move here is: if the state changes, ask how
the particles are arranged and moving.